        Asakusa
        Asakusa is the heart of Shitamachi, the quarter
        best-beloved of that fractious, gossipy, prodigal population called the
        Edokko, who trace their “downtown” roots back at least three
        generations. Edokko are suckers for sentimentality and for ninjo: the
        web of small favors and kindnesses that bind them together. Sneeze in
        the middle of the night and your Edokko neighbor will demand the next
        morning that you take better care of yourself; stay home with a fever
        and she will be over by noon with a bowl of soup. An Edokko craftsman
        would rather lose a commission than take any guff from a customer who
        doesn’t know good work when he sees it. Edokko quarrel in a language
        all their own, an earthy local dialect as profane and expressive as
        Brooklynese. Ignore the proprieties — or offend the pride of an
        Edokko — and he will let you know about it, in no uncertain terms;
        respect his sense of values and you make a friend for life.
        The heart of Asakusa, in turn, is Sensoji (also known as
        the Asakusa Kannon temple). According to legend, the temple houses a
        small statue of the Buddhist goddess of mercy, found in the Sumida
        River by two local fishermen in the year 628 — but in fact not even the
        temple priests have ever seen it. When Edo became the capital of the
        Tokugawa shogunate, Asakusa began to flourish as an entertainment
        quarter. In the early-19th century even the kabuki theaters were
        located here. The Meiji Restoration and the opening of Japan to exotic
        new Western-style amusements further enhanced Asakusa’s reputation as
        Fun City. The first place in Japan to call itself a “bar” opened in
        Asakusa in 1880 (and is still doing business); the first movie theater
        opened here in 1903. Before long, the streets and alleys around the
        temple were filled with music halls, burlesque theaters, cabarets,
        gambling dens, and watering holes of every description.
        Most of the temple quarter was firebombed to ashes in 1945,
        but by 1958 the people of the area had raised enough money to rebuild
        Sensoji and all of the important structures around it. So what if the
        restorations were in concrete? The original is still there in
        spirit — and no visitor should neglect it.

