        Ginza
        Tokyo’s best-known district is named after a silver mint
        originally located here. Once the epitome of chic, Ginza has lost many
        of its smartest young shoppers to the fashion boutiques of districts
        like Aoyama and Omote-sando, but the area is still fascinating.
        The windows of such department stores as Wako and
        Mitsukoshi are works of art. Inside, there’s more art: all the major
        department stores project themselves as bastions of culture,
        maintaining their own galleries and mounting frequent world-class
        exhibitions of prints, painting, pottery, and sculpture. Downstairs you
        can find still more “art” — to Western eyes at least — in the
        astonishing basement gourmet food displays. (The basement is also a
        good place for cheaper snacks than you’ll find in the street-level
        restaurants. )
        Running roughly north–south through Ginza from the corner
        of Hibiya Park all the way to Tokyo Bay is the broad avenue called
        Harumi-dori. Taking a stroll down the avenue is such a national
        institution that there’s even a colloquial expression for it: gin-bura.
        Just south of Ginza itself, as you walk toward the bay, you see on your
        left the red lanterns and long banners of the Kabuki-za, home base for
        that most thrilling and colorful form of traditional Japanese drama.
        The first kabuki theater was built in on this site in 1889. Designed to
        invoke the castle architecture of the Tokugawa period, the theater was
        destroyed in an air raid in World War II and rebuilt in 1951.
        Still farther south is the Tsukiji Central Wholesale
        Market — the largest fish market in Asia. Some 1,600 wholesale dealers
        do business here, supplying 90 percent of the fish consumed in Tokyo
        every day. Get here very early (5am is ideal) to see the tuna auctions
        and enjoy the orchestrated pandemonium of the market at its finest.
        From here, you could walk to the lovely Hama Rikyu Detached Palace
        Garden. Originally a Tokugawa family estate, the garden became a public
        park in 1945. The path to the left as you enter leads to the ferry
        landing, where the “river buses” depart for their journeys up the
        Sumida River to Asakusa.

