
        Highlights of the Prado Museum
        Spanish: Alongside modern master Pablo Picasso, Diego
        Velázquez y Silva (1599–1660) is the most famous Spanish painter who
        ever lived. He was hired by king Felipe IV and became an amazingly
        perceptive court painter and, quite simply, the greatest Spanish artist
        of the Golden Age. The royal family is featured in his seminal work,
        Las Meninas (the Maids of Honor). The artist painted himself with
        palette in hand at the left side of his own masterpiece, in a sense
        part of the family, as he became in real life.
        Another vast, unforgettable Velázquez canvas here is
        Surrender of Breda, commemorating a Spanish victory over Dutch forces
        in 1625. The chivalry of the winning general, the exhaustion of the
        loser, the less disguised emotions of their retinues, the array of
        upraised lances, and the burning landscape communicated a profound
        pathos. Elsewhere are Velázquez’s portraits of the high and the mighty,
        along with studies of fun-loving, ordinary mortals. Other great works
        include Las Hilanderas (The Spinners) and Los Borrachos (The
        Drunkards).
        Francisco de Goya (1746–1828), another court painter, had a
        tumultuous, wildly varied career, and excellent selections from nearly
        every phase of it are collected in the Prado, which has the largest
        Goya ensemble in the world. A philanderer in his youth, Goya fled
        Zaragoza in 1763 for the anonymity of Madrid. He went on to become the
        king’s principal artist. Of all the Prado’s paintings, none is more
        discussed and disputed than La Maja Desnuda (The Naked Maja), one of
        Spain’s first nudes. Rumors of a scandalous affair between Goya and the
        duchess of Alba have long been assumed. Goya’s most celebrated royal
        portrait, The Family of Carlos IV, is daringly frank and unflattering;
        only the royal children look remotely attractive. On still another
        level, The Executions of the 3rd of May, one of history’s most powerful
        protest pictures, depicts the shooting of Spanish patriots in 1808 by
        the French. Goya witnessed this tragedy of the War of Independence from
        his cottage, then went to the scene by moonlight to sketch the victims.
        New Goya rooms in the Prado were opened in March 1999. Goya’s harrowing
        “black paintings,” done when he was depressed and going deaf (see
        Saturn Devouring One of His Sons) have been moved, temporarily, from
        the ground floor to the second floor. They will be a focal point of the
        Prado’s planned expansion.
        El Greco (1541–1614) was born in Crete and was long a
        resident in Italy, but nonetheless became a consummate Spanish painter.
        He worked in Toledo, his adopted city, for 37 years, toiling away at
        the immense and intensely personal religious canvases that are his
        hallmark. Asymmetrical compositions and a mystical mood of ecstasy
        typify his work. Knight with his Hand on Chest, an early portrait, is
        realistic and alive, a study of a deep-eyed, bearded caballero
        (gentleman) in black. It is signed, in Greek letters, “Domenikos
        Theotokopoulos,” the artist’s real name. The Prado is also well
        supplied with El Greco’s passionately colored religious paintings, such
        as Adoration of the Shepherds. Felipe II didn’t care for El Greco’s
        revolutionary style, and later critics wondered whether his elongated
        figures were the result of myopia, but his mystical masterpieces live
        on.
        Francisco de Zurbarán (1598–1664), a member of the Seville
        school, combined mysticism and realism and was a master of light. His
        greatest works are of mythological, religious and historic themes. His
        deeply religious monks, priests, and saints are painted in flowing
        robes with almost tangible textures. The Prado owns his strained but
        fascinating battle picture, The Defense of Cádiz against the English,
        and the rarer Still Life of a goblet, two vases, and a pot emerging
        from a black background.
        Bartolomé Murillo (1617–1682), Spain’s most popular
        religious artist of his time, depicted revered Biblical personalities
        at ease. His tender scenes, as well as classical religious works with
        soaring angels, brought Murillo international fame, although detractors
        label his later work mawkish and saccharine.
        José Ribera (c. 1591–1652) spent much of his life in Italy,
        where the Valencia-born artist was known as lo Spagnoletto (the little
        Spaniard). His portraits of saints, hermits, and martyrs reveal
        impeccable drawing skills, composition, and keen exploitation of light
        and shadow.
        Dutch and Flemish: Hieronymus Bosch (c. 1450–1516), whom
        the Spanish call El Bosco, has three masterpieces in the Prado,
        including a large triptych called The Garden of Earthly Delights.
        Daringly mixing erotic fantasies and apocalyptic nightmares, it
        portrays the terrors and superstitions of the medieval peasant mind.
        Bosch’s wild hallucinations presage similar psychological explorations
        400 years later by Salvador Dalí.
        Peter Paul Rubens (1577–1640), of noble ancestry, pursued a
        career as a diplomat as well as an artist. The prolific Rubens is
        represented by dozens of paintings in the Prado. Of particular note is
        the huge Adoration of the Magi, a brilliant religious extravaganza, and
        The Three Graces, a portrait of fleshy nudes with an equally lush
        landscape. The blonde on the left is said to be Rubens’s second wife,
        Helena.
        The greatest work of Rogier van der Weyden (c. 1400– 1464),
        Descent From the Cross, an altarpiece, should not be missed.
        Italian: Titian (c. 1490–1576) is represented by several
        paintings, one of the greatest of which is the Portrait of the Emperor
        Carlos V. Depicting Titian’s patron in armor, on horseback at the
        battle of Mühlberg, it set the standard for court painters over the
        next century. Titian also produced religious works, but seemed to have
        no difficulty changing gears to the downright lascivious: Baccanal is
        about as far as an orgy can go within the bounds of a museum.
        The collection of paintings by Raphael (1483–1520) in the
        Prado was once kidnapped by Napoleon and carted off to Paris, though
        soon recovered. Centuries of investigation have failed to uncover the
        identity of The Cardinal, Raphael’s explosive character study of a
        subject with fishy eyes, aqualine nose, and cool, thin lips.
        Tintoretto (1518–1594) brought mannerism to Venice. Look
        for his dramatic Bible stories, originally ceiling paintings, and, on
        quite another plane, the close-up of a Lady Revealing her Bosom. On
        your way through the Italian rooms, be sure to keep an eye peeled for
        Fra Angelico’s glowing and stupendous Annunciation, as well as for
        Antonello da Messina’s realistically detailed, intensely tragic Christ
        Sustained by an Angel, and Sandro Botticelli’s The Story of Nastagio
        Degli Onesti.
        A Prado annex, the Casón del Buen Retiro, up the hill in
        calle de Felipe IV, houses a collection of 19th-century paintings, but
        remained closed for renovations in 2000.
        Across the Paseo del Prado is the Museo
        Thyssen-Bor­nemizsa, a recent addition to Madrid’s already impressive
        art collections housed in the Palacio de Villahermosa. This elegant
        three-story brick palace has been specifically renovated to house one
        of the largest known private collections of ancient and modern
        paintings, the property of the German industrialist Baron von
        Thyssen-Bornemizsa. More than 800 paintings are exhibited, dating from
        the 13th century to the present day. From the 19th and 20th centuries
        there are examples of trends such as the Paris school, German
        expressionism, Russian avant-garde, and American abstract painting.
        Like a survey of Western art, among the most important collections are
        classical works by Fra Angélico, Van Eyck, Dürer, Rembrandt, Hals,
        Titian, Van Dyck, and Rubens, and Impressionist works by Manet, Monet,
        Renoir, Gaugain, Toulouse-Lautrec, Cézanne, and Van Gogh, among many
        others. An impressive private collection it certainly is, but there are
        those who have criticized it as an ostentatious collection of minor
        works by major artists.
        The third anchor in the golden art trio, a landmark of old
        Madrid, is the Hospital de San Carlos (c/ Santa I­sa­bel 52), which now
        houses the Centro de Arte Reina Sofía. The museum focuses on Spanish
        and international 20th- century art, and is best known for exhibiting
        Pi­ca­sso’s monumental ­Guer­nica behind bulletproof glass. Held in the
        Museum of Modern Art in New York until the death of Franco, per the
        artist’s wishes, Guernica, a panorama of horror provoked by the Spanish
        Civil War bombing of a defenseless Basque town, is perhaps the 20th
        century’s most famous painting. On display alongside are the original
        sketches and studies showing the work that went into the final canvas.
        The center also houses other paintings of Pi­casso, as well as an
        opulent collection of works by Miró, Dalí, Julio González, and Juan
        Gris.
        Directly across from the Reina Sofía is the Atocha train
        station, an iron-and-glass affair with a small botanical garden inside.
        If you want to catch the high-speed AVE train to Córdoba and Seville,
        or other trains to the south of Spain, this is where you’ll need to go.
        South­east of the train station is the Real Fábrica de Ta­pi­ces (Royal
        Tapestry Factory, c/ Fuenterrabía, 2). All that has changed since
        Felipe V found­ed this workshop in 1721 is the method of dyeing the
        wool. The same 18th-century looms are still used, though the number of
        workers has dwindled considerably. Goya worked here, creating the
        designs on which tapestries were based. They are still being copied,
        along with contemporary designs, on commission.
        Immediately east of the Museo del Prado is the city’s major
        green space, Parque del Buen Retiro. Until a little more than a century
        ago, Retiro Park was a royal preserve. Today its lawns, gardens and
        promenades are the most convenient and enjoyable place for many
        Madrileños to take a family outing (see page 9). In summer, kids and
        lovers rent rowboats and paddle about the small lake in the center of
        the park. The Palacio de Cristal (Crystal Palace), a 19th-century iron
        and glass solarium that houses temporary art exhibitions, has finally
        reopened after years of renovations.
        Another central breathing space, the Real Jardín Botánico
        (Royal Botanical Garden), adjacent to the Prado, was founded two
        centuries ago and is packed with enlightening displays of flowers and
        trees.
        At the northwest corner of Retiro Park is Puerta de
        Al­ca­lá, a monumental triumphal arch surmounted by warrior-angels,
        honoring Carlos III. Until the late 19th century, this marked the
        eastern edge of Madrid. Now the Plaza de la Independencia, in which the
        arch stands, is a bedlam of midtown traffic and gateway to newer
        barrios east.

