
        Modern Madrid
        Madrid’s third major expansion took place in the 19th
        century, resulting in the foundations of modern Madrid, a sprawling
        succession of residential neighborhoods, shops, cinemas, restaurants,
        banks and smaller museums. Barrio de Salamanca is the most attractive
        and exclusive of these, and Gran Vía is the great turn-of-the-century
        avenue that connects east to west, old to new Madrid.
        Paseo de Recoletos is a continuation of Paseo del Prado
        that runs from Plaza de la Cibeles to Plaza Colón. A block east is the
        distinguished Museo Arqueológico (c/ Serrano, 13). The museum’s
        archaeology collection addresses the art of ancient inhabitants of
        Spain, with statuettes and jewelry from 2nd-century b.c. Carthaginian
        settlers and miraculously preserved mosaics from 2nd-century a.d. Roman
        Spain. An unforgettable item is La Dama de Elche (the Lady of Elche), a
        stone sculpture found in Alicante province in 1897. This thoroughly
        noble goddess, with beautiful cheekbones, lips, and eyes, and wearing a
        fanciful headdress, may be 2,500 years old. On the museum grounds — or,
        more correctly, under the ground — is a careful reproduction of the
        painted scenes discovered in a cave in Altamira in northern Spain:
        prehistoric depictions of animals, dating back 15,000 years and
        representing man’s first illustrations of the world around him. They
        are said to be some of the finest prehistoric cave drawings ever
        discovered.
        Plaza de Colón is a large open space that has been the
        recent scene of far-reaching public-works projects. The city airport
        bus terminal operates below ground, beneath an 1885 statue of
        Christopher Columbus and a monument to the discovery of the New World.
        There is also the Centro Cultural de la Villa (City Cultural Center),
        with facilities for concerts, theatre, art exhibitions, and films.
        Paseo de la Castellana is Madrid’s principal north-south
        avenue, running for several miles through the heart of the city and
        bordering the Salamanca district to its west. In the area north of
        Plaza de Colón, you come to a newer section of town, where patrician
        townhouses in the central area give way to luxurious modern apartment
        blocks with landscaped balconies.
        Museo Lázaro Galdiano (c/ Serrano, 122) is an astonishingly
        wide-ranging and priceless private collection. Featured here are
        ancient jewelry, including a Celtic diadem from the 2nd century b.c. ,
        medieval and Renaissance masterpieces in ivory and enamel, gold and
        silver, rare church vestments, and medieval weapons. Its paintings
        comprise a Rembrandt portrait of Saskia van Uylenburgh, dated the year
        they were married; Hieronymus Bosch at his most diabolical; a rich
        repository of Goya official portraits, colorful sketches of real life,
        and haunting scenes of witches and horrors; El Greco’s sensitive St.
        Francis of Assisi and an early (1562) picture from his Venetian period;
        and the English painters Reynolds, Gainsborough, and Constable. But the
        museum’s greatest pride, spotlighted in its own niche on the ground
        floor, is a portrait of angelic beauty, painted around 1480 by Leonardo
        Da Vinci, entitled The Saviour.
        Another smaller but equally interesting museum is the Museo
        Sorolla (Paseo del General Martínez Campos, 37). The only Madrid museum
        devoted to a single painter, this mansion was the hom e and studio of
        Joaquín Sorolla (1863–1923). It has close to 300 paintings on view,
        showing the Valencian impressionist’s favorite seaside scenes and
        landscapes. The house has a charming lived-in feel.
        Quite a way east of the Salamanca barrio is the Plaza de
        Toros y Museo Taurino (Bullfighting Ring and Museum), officially called
        the Plaza de Toros Monumental de Las Ventas. This is where to go to see
        an authentic bullfight, a seemingly anachronistic pursuit that
        continues to inspire the passions of so many Madrileños. The small
        museum houses historic posters, capes, swords, paintings, and photos
        for aficionados of the corrida, and is perhaps best visited out of
        bullfighting season for those who want to get a glimpse of the interior
        of the ring.

