
        Museo del Prado
        Madrid’s pride, the Prado museum, is indisputably the
        world’s greatest collection of Spanish paintings and one of the world’s
        most prestigious museums. Even apart from its Spanish treasures, it
        deserves high priority on any visitor’s agenda for its hundreds of
        famous foreign works, especially of the Italian and Flemish schools.
        This immense hoard of art works, ranging from the 12th to the 19th
        century, was collected and donated by Spain’s Hapsburg and Bourbon
        kings, private patrons of the arts, and convents and monasteries around
        the country.
        Despite its greatness, the museum came about somewhat by
        chance. More than two centuries ago, Carlos III commissioned the
        architect Juan de Villanueva, draftsman of the royal palace, to design
        this Neo-classical building. It was to have serv­ed as a museum of
        natural history, but after some eventful delays (Napoleon’s invasion
        badly damaged the building), its mission was diverted to art, and the
        royal museum of painting was inaugurated in 1819. In 1868 it became El
        Mu­seo del Prado.
        In the early 1990s, modernization projects, such as
        desperately needed air conditioning and humidity control, caused
        upheaval in the museum. Although these are now completed, further
        renovation and work on an extension are underway. The famed Spanish
        architect Rafael Moneo, a Pritzker prize winner, is set to begin the
        Prado’s long-awaited expansion so that more of its vast collection can
        be exhibited.
        The Prado owns perhaps 10,000 paintings, but at present can
        only display about 10 percent of them (the overflow is either in
        storage or on loan to museums around the world. ) Seeing and
        appreciating even that many great paintings could occupy a serious
        student of art for many weeks. Short-term visitors may have to settle
        for the condensed highlights, perhaps in a hectic couple of hours.
        To take in more Old Masters per mile, it’s vital to plan
        ahead. Decide what you want to see and head for it first, even if it
        demands that you rush past obvious masterworks. Given the usual crowds,
        you’d be wise to rest your feet from time to time, or seek refreshment
        in the basement restaurant.

