
        Near the Puerta del Sol
        Puerta del Sol (Gateway to the Sun) is Madrid’s busiest
        plaza and for centuries has been the commercial hub of the city. Today
        it marks the transition between Hapsburg Madrid and the city expansion
        of the Bourbon kings. The original gate that once existed here — part
        of the ancient town wall — was torn down in 1570. Ten streets converge
        on the plaza, and all the radial highways of Spain are measured from
        Puerta del Sol, designated “Kilometer Zero” (on the sidewalk on the
        south side of the square is a symbol of this distinction).
        The no-nonsense, Neo-classical building on the south side
        of the square (Casa de Correos) houses the main offices of the regional
        government. Thousands of Madrileños gather here for a ritual every New
        Year’s Eve. They try to swallow a dozen grapes while the clock atop the
        building strikes 12, after which pandemonium breaks out.
        Facing all the bustle of a remodeled Puerta del Sol is a
        statue based on Madrid’s coat of arms, which depicts a bear leaning
        against a madroño tree (an arbutus, or strawberry tree). The bear is a
        symbol of Madrid, while the Tío Pepe sign, an advertisement for one of
        Spain’s most famous brands of sherry, has become the unofficial symbol
        of the Puerta del Sol.
        Just north of the Puerta del Sol and next door to the
        Ministry of Finance, is the Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San
        Fernando — call it the Museum of the Royal Academy. It possesses a
        celebrated collection of Goya’s paintings, including Burial of the
        Sardine, and a superb self-portrait of the artist in his old age.
        Velázquez, Murillo, and Rubens are also represented among the hundreds
        of works on display. The Royal Academy also has a magnificent
        collection of paintings by Zurbarán, rivaling that of the Prado Museum.
        Representative of the artist’s austere, devotional style is Vision of
        the Blessed Alonso Rodríguez.
        Southeast of Puerta del Sol is Plaza Santa Ana and the
        Huertas district, both of which are chock full of restaurants, tascas
        and tapas bars, theaters, and live music and flamenco clubs. The area
        really springs to life at night.

